OSDOCS-4183: add enabling serial console (#50697)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/installation-user-infra-machines-advanced-customizing-live-serial-console.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies
//
// * installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-bare-metal.adoc
// * installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-restricted-networks-bare-metal.adoc
// * installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-bare-metal-network-customizations.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="installation-user-infra-machines-advanced-customizing-live-{boot}-serial-console_{context}"]
= Modifying a live install {boot-media} to enable the serial console

> By default, the serial console is disabled and all output is written to the graphical console. You can enable the serial console with the following procedure.

Reviewer: This procedure also disables the graphical console, which may not be desired.

In general, this text assumes that the user understands what they need to do, and just focuses on the how.  We should probably start by mentioning some install scenarios which benefit from a serial console (a bare metal SME could help here) and which debugging scenarios (loss of network connectivity, Ignition failures, boot failures) require access to a working console.  We might also want to explain that they can have one console of each type, that the primary console is the last one specified, and that the secondary console receives fewer types of logging information.

Also, should we say "On clusters installed with 4.12 and above, the serial console is disabled by default..."?

Author: > In general, this text assumes that the user understands what they need to do, and just focuses on the how

This is just how it goes for procedure modules, but I can add a concept module that goes more in-depth on these topics. 

> Also, should we say "On clusters installed with 4.12 and above, the serial console is disabled by default..."?

Probably, just to avoid any confusion wrt upgrading existing clusters 🙂

.Procedure

. Download the `coreos-installer` binary from the link:https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/coreos-installer/latest/[`coreos-installer` image mirror] page.

ifeval::["{boot-media}" == "ISO image"]

> . Retrieve the {op-system} ISO image from the link:https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/dependencies/rhcos/latest/[{op-system} image mirror] page and run the following command to customize the ISO image to enable the serial console to receive output:

Reviewer: This could be read to imply that it affects the console for the _ISO_ boot, but it only affects the installed system.  The console for the ISO boot can be set with `--live-karg-append console=...`.

Author: Good point, i'll add a note around here that addresses this

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ coreos-installer iso customize rhcos-<version>-live.x86_64.iso \
  --dest-console ttyS0 \ <1>
  --dest-device /dev/sda <2>
----
+

> <1> The desired primary console. In this case, the serial console.

Reviewer: We should have more text in this section explaining the syntax of the argument.  In particular, a bare `ttyS0` defaults to 9600 bps (because that's the kernel default), which is probably not desired.

// Module included in the following assemblies
//
// * installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-bare-metal.adoc
// * installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-restricted-networks-bare-metal.adoc
// * installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-bare-metal-network-customizations.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE

> [id="installation-user-infra-machines-advanced-customizing-live-{boot}-serial-console_{context}"]

Reviewer 2: not sure if we can have `{}` in an ID like that :thinking:

Author: You mean the `:boot:` attribute? I've done it before and it doesn't seem to cause any issues 😬

= Modifying a live install {boot-media} to enable the serial console

On clusters installed with {product-title} 4.12 and above, the serial console is disabled by default and all output is written to the graphical console. You can enable the serial console with the following procedure.

.Procedure

. Download the `coreos-installer` binary from the link:https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/coreos-installer/latest/[`coreos-installer` image mirror] page.

ifeval::["{boot-media}" == "ISO image"]
. Retrieve the {op-system} ISO image from the link:https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/dependencies/rhcos/latest/[{op-system} image mirror] page and run the following command to customize the ISO image to enable the serial console to receive output:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ coreos-installer iso customize rhcos-<version>-live.x86_64.iso \

>   --dest-ignition <path> \ <1>

Reviewer 2: same fix for callouts here as earlier

  --dest-console tty0 \ <2>
  --dest-console ttyS0,<options> \ <3>
  --dest-device /dev/sda <4>
----
+
<1> The location of the Ignition config to install.
<2> The desired secondary console. In this case, the graphical console. Omitting this option will disable the graphical console.
<3> The desired primary console. In this case, the serial console. The `options` field defines the baud rate and other settings. A common value for this field is `115200n8`. If no options are provided, the default kernel value of `9600n8` is used. For more information on the format of this option, see the link:https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/serial-console.html[Linux kernel serial console] documentation.

> <4> The specified disk to install to. In this case, `/dev/sda`. If you omit this option, the {boot-media} automatically runs the installer which will fail unless you also specify the `coreos.inst.install_dev` kernel argument.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<4> The specified disk to install to. In this case, `/dev/sda`. If you omit this option, the {boot-media} automatically runs the installation program which will fail unless you also specify the `coreos.inst.install_dev` kernel argument.
```

+
[NOTE]
====
The `--dest-console` option affects the installed system and not the live ISO system. To modify the console for a live ISO system, use the `--live-karg-append` option and specify the console with `console=`.
====
+
Your customizations are applied and affect every subsequent boot of the {boot-media}.

> . Optional: To remove the {boot-media} customizations and return the image to its pristine state, run the following command:

Reviewer 2: Not sure about "pristine" - perhaps "original"?

Author: That does sound better 😎

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ coreos-installer iso reset rhcos-<version>-live.x86_64.iso
----
+

> You can now re-customize the live {boot-media} or use it in its pristine state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now recustomize the live {boot-media} or use it in its pristine state.
```

// * installing/installing_bare_metal/installing-bare-metal-network-customizations.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="installation-user-infra-machines-advanced-customizing-live-{boot}-serial-console_{context}"]
= Modifying a live install {boot-media} to enable the serial console

On clusters installed with {product-title} 4.12 and above, the serial console is disabled by default and all output is written to the graphical console. You can enable the serial console with the following procedure.

.Procedure

. Download the `coreos-installer` binary from the link:https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/coreos-installer/latest/[`coreos-installer` image mirror] page.

ifeval::["{boot-media}" == "ISO image"]
. Retrieve the {op-system} ISO image from the link:https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/dependencies/rhcos/latest/[{op-system} image mirror] page and run the following command to customize the ISO image to enable the serial console to receive output:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ coreos-installer iso customize rhcos-<version>-live.x86_64.iso \
  --dest-ignition <path> \ <1>
  --dest-console tty0 \ <2>

>   --dest-console ttyS0,<baudrate> \ <3>

Reviewer 3: The second field doesn't only include the baud rate. Maybe let's call it e.g.

```suggestion
  --dest-console ttyS0,<options> \ <3>
```

  --dest-device /dev/sda <4>
----
+
<1> The location of the Ignition config to install.
<2> The desired secondary console. In this case, the graphical console. Omitting this option will disable the graphical console.

> <3> The desired primary console. In this case, the serial console. If the baudrate is omitted, the default value of `9600` bps is used. For more information on the format of this option, see the link:https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/serial-console.html[Linux kernel serial console] documentation.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we should suggest the default we use (`115200n8`) on most other platforms where we do encode a serial console. It's a saner default than the kernel's. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
<3> The desired primary console. In this case, the serial console. The `options` field defines the baud rate and other settings. A common value is `115200n8`. If no options are provided, the default kernel value of `9600n8` is used. For more information on the format of this option, see the link:https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/serial-console.html[Linux kernel serial console] documentation.
```

<4> The specified disk to install to. In this case, `/dev/sda`. If you omit this option, the {boot-media} automatically runs the installer which will fail unless you also specify the `coreos.inst.install_dev` kernel argument.
+
[NOTE]
====
The `--dest-console` option affects the installed system and not the live ISO system. To modify the console for a live ISO system, use the `--live-karg-append` option and specify the console with `console=`.
====
+
Your customizations are applied and affect every subsequent boot of the {boot-media}.

. Optional: To remove the {boot-media} customizations and return the image to its pristine state, run the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ coreos-installer iso reset rhcos-<version>-live.x86_64.iso
----
+
You can now re-customize the live {boot-media} or use it in its pristine state.

[NOTE]
====
The `--dest-console` option affects the installed system and not the live ISO system. To modify the console for a live ISO system, use the `--live-karg-append` option and specify the console with `console=`.

> ====

Reviewer 3: Looks like a repeat.

Author: Oops, good catch!

endif::[]

ifeval::["{boot-media}" == "PXE environment"]
. Retrieve the {op-system} `kernel`, `initramfs` and `rootfs` files from the link:https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/dependencies/rhcos/latest/[{op-system} image mirror] page and the Ignition config file, and then run the following command to create a new customized `initramfs` file that enables the serial console to receive output:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ coreos-installer pxe customize rhcos-<version>-live-initramfs.x86_64.img \
  --dest-ignition <path> \ <1>
  --dest-console tty0 \ <2>

>   --dest-console ttyS0,<baudrate> \ <3>

Reviewer 3: Same comments as above.
